First of all, I need to ask, because what this is
going to do is it's going to go into the archives,
kind of collection of interviews we have at A&M, so
is it okay if you wind up here? No. Okay. First, can
you give your rank, name rank, where you were
stationed, that kind of thing? Okay. My name is
Kirby B. Terry. I was a major in the Medical Corps. I
entered Vietnam and was assigned to Americal
Division. Um, and I was a clearing company
commander for about six months. And following
that, I spent six months in two other hospitals,
one in, uh, An K, North, uh, Central Highlands,
and, uh, spent three months in, uh, Quignon,
uh, which is on the coast about midway down
Vietnam. What do you, um, What years were you
there? When did you... I was there from October 68
to October 69. So that's right after you were
there, right after the Tet Offensive. Yeah, the
Tet Offensive was in January 68. I arrived in
October 68. We also had a Tet Offensive in 1969, but
it was much smaller. Where were you stationed in
the United States when you were doing your
training there? Well, I entered the Army in... El
Paso, Texas at William Beaumont Army Hospital in
1966.
As a first lieutenant, and received my commission
and became a captain in the Army Medical Corps. I
was assigned to William Beaumont Army Hospital
for a year. I did my internship at William Beaumont
Army Hospital. From there, I then went to Tripler
Army Hospital in Honolulu, Hawaii. And spent a
year and general surgery there. Following this I
spent three months at the Army Field Service
School in San Antonio, Texas, where I received all
my basic orientation and pre-Vietnam training
skills. Then from there I went directly to
Saigon, that's where I entered the country. After
spending a couple days of orientation there, I
then flew to Chulalongkorn, which was up near Da
Nang in the north part of South Vietnam. You
mentioned that you were given some training
before going over there. Could you talk a little
bit about what kind of training you got a few months
before you went to Vietnam?
We didn't really receive any combat training. We
received what we would consider, I think,
defensive training. We spent most of the month
learning how to salute, how to recognize people of
various ranks.
We went through the basic courses at Fort Sam
Houston on weaponry and how to use a gas mask. We
learned how to read compass. Took some hikes. We
did a lot of marching and drilling, but we didn't do
any real... We weren't learning to be combat
soldiers at all. Did you get any cultural or
training about how the people were going to react
to you or language training, things like that? We
didn't get any language training, but we spent a
good bit of time in the orientation classes trying
to be taught how the people were going to react to us
and how we should try to react to them. Do you think
any of this was effective at all? Helpful? Oh, I
think it was quite effective. Much more effective
than if we'd had none, because most of us had very
little understanding of how the Oriental people
act and react. Was it at all accurate? Were they
pretty close to what was going on? I think so. Yeah,
I think so. Then you also mentioned your
orientation once you got to Saigon in July. Could
you talk a little bit about what that was? Well,
basically, when you get there, you hear cannons
and stuff going off all the time, and people
basically just try to orient you so that you can
learn to tell incoming rounds from outgoing
rounds. So that for outgoing, then you obviously
don't have to be concerned about them. For
incoming, you better get under the bed or get in the
nearest hole. All right. They also passed out and
assigned you weapons, that sort of thing, so that
you had some protection. For instance, I was
assigned a .45 pistol and an M16 rifle and the usual
flak jacket, helmet, so that I would have some
protection because I was basically just in a
staging area and nobody was watching out for us.
And then I was waiting until the flight was
assigned to me to go to July. But if I had gotten lost
or misplaced somewhere in between there, no one
would have probably known exactly where I was or
who I was. Was that right? Without my dog tags, you
know, that sort of thing. Did you experience a lot
of, you know, being mortared in artillery fire,
things like that, just at the bases and areas you
were in, or was that pretty uncommon? No. At the
time I arrived, that was pretty uncommon. almost
anywhere in Vietnam you were though, you would
hear outgoing rounds all the time. And that was
basically from our hires. And I always thought it
was just a program they had to kind of keep
everybody alerts and knowing that something was
going on. I think they just basically peppered the
hillsides with with artillery shells all the
time. Was that mostly to keep just to keep us aware
that the war was on, or was it an effective thing
against the Vietnamese that they see? Well, I
think it's kind of both, actually. Because when
you sit around eight hours a day with nothing at all
going on, people start to get lackadaisical. And
if something's happening, it keeps you aware that
the war's still going on, because when you get
lackadaisical, that's when things usually
happen and people get hurt. It was also important,
I think, to let Charlie know that we knew where he
was, And no matter where he was, when something was
sighted from the air, somebody would shoot at it.
You mentioned that you were a clearing company
commander. Could you explain what that was and
what your command was? Yeah. A clearing company in
an infantry division is basically a group of about
107 to 122 men who... whose assignment, like in
World War II, was to stay behind the lines and clear
people who had minor wounds, take care of them,
keep them around a few days, and then send them back
to combat. If they were severely wounded, they
would be sent on to a major hospital for more care.
In Vietnam, the clearing company was kind of an
obsolete setup, except that we took care mostly of
minor injuries and mostly skin problems, because
everybody had severe acne. If they had acne, their
acne acted up. If they had, I mean they continually
had problems with fungus infections in their feet
and groin and hair and all those sort of things
simply because they weren't dry most of the time.
So we took care mostly of minor medical injuries
and minor surgical injuries. The more major
injuries at this time went directly over us to a
hospital, which was two or three miles away. And
the hospital's where I went to later on after I
served in this clearing company for six months.
What were some of the types of people who were under
your command? Most of the guys that were under my
command were what I would consider like nursing
type people. They were trained combat medics. and
orderlies and a large number of them would go out
with infantry units during the day for like two or
three months at a stretch and then come back and
work in this little clearing company for a while
until they rested up and then they'd go back out
with an infantry unit they were mostly people who
would be like a licensed practical nurse and this
sort of thing and we did have those 60 to 90 bed
capability in our little hospital all the time
there Most of these guys were pretty educated.
Most of them had, all of them had high school
educations. Many of them had college educations
and degrees. And I expect most of them went into
medicine or nursing or something of that nature
later on. Because they were mostly very highly
interested in medical problems. How risky of a job
was that being a medic with an infantry corps?
Being a medic with an infantry corps was very
risky. A lot of guys would want to go do it, and then
they'd do it a while, and then they'd try to get out
of it if they could because it was a very dangerous
job. I would rate it as the second most dangerous
job in Vietnam, really. Who was the first? I'd say
helicopter piloting was the first because any
time somebody got wounded, the helicopter pilot
came in to rescue them, and the enemy could see the
helicopter very easily if they shot the man, and
they could probably shoot a helicopter, which was
a lot bigger, and it was in the same vicinity.
The... Medic, however, had to go treat the person
who had just gotten shot as soon as he could get
there. And if one man got shot, it was very
difficult to get to him without getting shot
yourself. And the Vietnamese didn't hold back at
all in shooting medics as far as I could tell. I
mean, getting one man just meant the medic was
going to be there in a little bit. If you waited
around, you could shoot him too. And I think that's
what happened lots of times. It was a very
dangerous job, plus the fact that once you got
there and did what you could do for him, you were the
guy closest to him, and you had to try to drag him out
to a safety spot, and that was very dangerous also.
Were there, were there ever any racial problems
you ever came across? We talked a little bit about
this in class. We had a black historian come in to
speak to us. Did you ever run across anything like
that while you were there? fairly minor racial
problems. The clearing company that I was
commander of had about probably 15% blacks
assigned to it. And we generally didn't have very
much problem at all, except that if they didn't see
that they were getting an equal shake about
everything, they would complain about it more so
than the average white person would, I thought.
But in general, I think they did a very good job.
They were very good soldiers, and they were very
patriotic, and I was very pleased to have served
with them. And at the time you were in Vietnam, what
do you feel was the goal of the U.S. military? What
did you see as what we were trying to accomplish at
that point in time, right after Tet and until you
left?
As an officer in the Medical Corps, I don't know
that I really knew what the goal there was or what it
was clearly stated to be because I didn't see
anything that really looked like we were going
towards a goal. We were basically, at the time I was
there, trying to win the hearts and minds of the
people in order to get Vietnam back on its feet so
that the South Vietnamese could take care of
themselves against the North. I thought it was
poorly run most of the time and it seemed like it was
a very disjointed effort.
It was obvious to me at least I thought we could have
won the war very quickly had we wanted to and it
seemed illogical to me to waste all those years and
all those lives basically accomplishing nothing
and after we were there For about 13 years, we
really didn't accomplish anything that I could
tell. So I really don't think there was ever a
stated goal other than we were to win the hearts and
minds of the people, get them strong enough to take
care of themselves. We weren't there, I don't
think, to win over the North Vietnamese
communists. We were there to help the South
Vietnamese get strong enough to take care of
themselves. And that's the nearest thing I can
figure to a goal after... almost 20 years now. What
do you think would have been a way to have won the war
initially? You said we could have spent a long time
there and wasted a lot of lives. What do you feel we
could have done? Well, I think we should have
attacked the north right away if we were going to
and bombed their munitions plants, areas where
all their guns and their weapons were coming from.
and just had a concerted effort to wiped out all of
their supplies. I suppose our our superiors were
afraid that if we did that Chinese would come in to
help them. However, it didn't appear that we were
accomplishing anything the way we were doing it
because one or two North Vietnamese communist
could keep an entire division of 10 to 20,000 men
upset most of the time just by firing an occasional
rocket into the large division compound and this
would usually upset things for two to three hours
so if one guy could do that three or four times a day
he could keep that division from doing anything
really worthwhile and we frequently saw that uh
now then You mentioned that we were trying to win
the hearts and minds. What types of things were you
doing with the Vietnamese people in the area,
things like that? Well, we tried in almost every
way we could to make them feel that they were doing a
good job. I myself and the medical company that I
was commanding, we had what was called MedCap
missions, M-E-D-C-A-P. And basically these were
medical missions in which once a week in the
afternoon we would go out to a village and give
medical care. Basically, what we did was treat
people with acute illnesses, chronic illnesses.
We'd give them inoculations with pulled teeth. We
basically did things to try to make them trust us.
And that was probably our biggest mission because
if the people were really sick or really were
injured, they were brought into our hospitals
almost immediately. The people themselves, the
villagers would bring them in? Mm-hmm. And they
would be admitted. If they could prove that they
weren't a communist, they would be admitted and
taken directly to a hospital. We treated many,
many civilians very frequently. Do you think that
they appreciated us being there, or were they
mostly just, we were just another... I can't
really answer that. Most of the people that I work
with seem to appreciate us at a superficial level
because we gave them jobs, we gave them money, we
gave them food. But as far as ever gaining their
confidence, I'm not sure we ever did that. in the
time period that I was there at least. We'd been
there for about 10 years before I got there. So I
don't think we really ever accomplished that
goal. Was communication a very big problem with
the people? Were interpreters pretty much
available for you to use? Yeah, we always had
interpreters. available and communications
were just no problem at all. Communications in the
country was also excellent because there were
very good radio and telephone contacts
everywhere. And you could usually reach help
somewhere no matter where you're at.
But as far as working with people and
understanding their immediate problems, that
was never much of a problem for as I could tell.
because the interpretation was very good.
Were there many non-military groups that were
doing similar things, like the Red Cross,
Catholic Church, those type? Were you involved
with anything? Well, the ones that I mainly saw
were the Red Cross. There were also a good number of
civilians there doing things for our government,
and I don't know exactly who paid them, but they
were there building roads and building bridges
and building new buildings for us, and they
basically were just Caucasians from almost
anywhere who were just paid as civilians to work
there. They were non-military people. They
didn't fight or do anything. They were just
helping build. The other groups that I saw were
there were a good number of Australians there.
There were a good number of people from New Zealand
who were working as advisors. I don't know that
they were actually fighting. There was they did a
good bit of medical missionary also. There were a
lot of Koreans soldiers there, the Iraqs. And they
were very good soldiers and I think their stated
goal was to help the Vietnamese in any way they
could win the war. And they were some of the finest
soldiers I ever saw. Did you ever notice any racial
tensions between the Vietnamese and the Koreans?
I don't think I did because I was never around where
they lived. I just saw them here and there and took
care of them when they were sick. But the Koreans, I
thought, were
very good soldiers. They were very well trained.
They were slightly arrogant, and I think they kind
of looked down upon the Vietnamese. And in
general, rather than working closely with the
Vietnamese, it seemed to me that they were
assigned to their own units, like the ROC unit
would go out and do everything all by itself, and
they didn't... particularly mess around with the
Vietnamese at all. They did things the way they
wanted to when they went out to accomplish a
mission. Yeah, that's basically the way we've
talked about it, and it's been just like that.
They've been separated, because historically,
that's a lot of thousands of years that they've
been racially different from each other. Now, as a
commander, you know, were you ever involved with,
you know, problems with getting supplies and
things like that, and having to really work with
the Vietnamese to get that or the bureaucracy?
Well, we had to work with the bureaucracy a good bit
to get what we needed.
The Vietnamese had almost nothing. We had the best
of everything in the way of medical supplies. We
were probably better equipped than the average
hospital in the United States. And the rumor was
that if you were injured in Vietnam, you were
probably better off than if you had been injured in
front of a hospital in the United States because
within 7 to 10 minutes after an injury occurred,
there was usually a helicopter there to take care
of that wounded person and bring him to the
hospital. So they were actually getting medical
care within 10 to 15 minutes most of the time. And in
general, the infantry units were told, when you
establish your very first contact, you should put
in an order for a helicopter immediately. That
way, if anybody gets hurt, the helicopter will be
there in a few minutes. If nobody gets hurt, then
you just cancel the order. And we commonly would
see people who had been injured less than 30
minutes by the time we saw them. That's pretty
amazing. It really is. Now, you know, on the base,
I'm sure there were a lot of times when you didn't
have things to do and all that. What was sort of the
life like? What went on on the base? Well, there was
only about three or four things to do around the
average division compound, and each company had
its own division. mess hall and that sort of thing.
We also had officers clubs that at each division
level and there were probably several of them and
the officers would usually go there in the evening
if they had time. The non-commissioned officers
had the same kind of club also and they would
frequent it in the evenings. Most people, you
know, wrote letters home, or dictated letters
home. We all had little tape recorders. We could
send the tapes back and forth.
Many of us organized educational facilities. I
started teaching some anatomy and physiology
classes. And some of the orderlies and medics who
were wanting to get further degrees would take the
class that I taught in anatomy and physiology. And
it was through the University of Maryland. They
would actually get college credit for it. The
worst thing about most wars is most people aren't
very busy and they
they're not occupied, except maybe for 14 hours a
day that work at somewhere, eight hours a day, then
they have two or three, four hours of whatever and
then the rest of the time they had free. Our groups
had a lot of physical activities. We had
basketball goals and volleyball goals and We
frequently played various kinds of ball games,
pitched horseshoes, pitched washers. We also had
television, which was available in most base
camps. And television was about a week old by the
time you saw it. It was shipped in. It's on
videotape. So you would find out what happened a
week later. But most of the shows you watch on
television, it doesn't matter when they're
recorded, actually. And it's kind of
entertaining. So that's basically how most
people spend their time. And we've, in some of the
lectures we've had, we've had some guest speakers
who've come in, and we had one recently who talked
about, was talking about the films of the war, and
he specifically mentioned MASH. You know, I had
always assumed it was a war about Korea, but
actually he said that it was a war about Vietnam
placed in Korea. Would you draw that correlation
in any way, this being his doctoral hospital? I
don't know. I never thought of it that way before.
I've never seen the... seen the correlation. I
think after I haven't watched MASH many times in
the last 20 years, probably only 15 or 20 times. And
I think MASH was basically a movie about the
medical core in any war though, and it doesn't
particularly matter which one it was. I think
that's probably probably applies if it would
apply as well as Vietnam or Korea as any place else.
Because he had stressed that, you know, how the
craziness of it all was, how, you know, the boredom
and just the anxieties. That was all very accurate
about Vietnam, I can say that. Plus, the
helicopter changed the face of the war, I think,
because people could be flown directly to a battle
site rather than having to be jeeped up or walked
up. If some action was really going on and you
needed replacements, they would fly them in
immediately. It also made medical care 100%
different, too, simply because, you know, you get
to the hospital very quickly when you're injured.
In World War II, it might be a day or two before you
got to a medical facility. That's an interesting
correlation. I hadn't heard that before. Now, how
was the protection of your base area? Were you, you
know, it was a pretty secure area, or were you ever,
did you ever seem like you were in danger at any
point in time? No, I don't think, I never felt in
danger. At one time, When I was in July, we lived
about 100 yards from the fence, and all there was
between our huts and the fence were our tents,
actually, was a road and some blank land. And then
out near the fence, there were guard posts all
along the fence. They were occupied mostly at
night by guard people. You never knew whether they
were alert. If somebody had come through the
fence, they could have gotten to our tents very
quickly and caused all sorts of trouble. But I
don't think most of us ever worried about that at
all. It's just one of the things, when you're
there, you just accept it after a while that if they
get in and get to you, that's all there is to it.
There's nothing you can do about it anyway, so you
just don't worry about it. Okay. And what were some
of the, your duties are on campus. What were some of
the more pleasant and some of the more unpleasant
things you had to do? Well, each morning as a
company commander, somebody usually woke me up
about 7 o'clock to sign the duty roster, and that
had to be filled out for the day, finishing up the 24
hours, and then I had to sign my signature that it
was accurate. Usually after this, I got out and
showered and shaved, and our shower was a
fuel tank that had been emptied washed out and
filled with cold water. And it had a faucet on the
bottom of it so we would spend a very short time in
that cold water in the morning waking up. And then
get dressed and go to the mess hall and have usually
a fairly traditional breakfast if you wanted it of
eggs and meat, bacon, coffee, and some juice. Then
we would usually make rounds in our little
hospital for maybe an hour and then either go do
some minor surgery or work on sick call, which we
would basically be seeing people from the
battalion level who needed further medical care,
and they would be brought over to us in a helicopter
by jeep. Our major things that we took care of all
day were basically these major skin problems I
told you about, where people just couldn't wear
their boots, they couldn't walk, they couldn't
carry their packs. We also saw a lot of malaria.
There was also a lot of diarrhea and dysentery and
nausea and vomiting. And these minor problems
were what we had to take care of most of the time. It
just took a few days for a guy to get calmed down and
get his confidence back and get to eating so he
could go back to his own unit. And we did basically
take care of a lot of injuries in this particular
location. They were mostly minor surgical and
major medical problems. I wonder about, you
mentioned some of the records keeping and things
like that. Was it your belief that most of that was
all pretty accurate and things like that, things
that came through your command or... Oh, you're
talking about body counts or... Well, yeah, that,
but yeah, I'm sure you probably worked too, that
was mostly with the, I'm sure you worked too
involved. Yeah. But, you know, just the
day-to-day things where they just, people would
get lazy and just, oh, well, it's... No, I think the
record keeping was done pretty accurately by most
people because there was always at least two or
three levels of people checking everything. For
instance, in our clearing company, this daily
record that had to be compiled and had to be signed
each morning gave a summary of what happened there
for 24 hours, how many sick people we saw, how many
we treated, how many we released, how many teeth
were pulled, how many x-rays were taken, how many
shots were given. I think it was all quite
accurate. From my level as a company commander,
though, it then went to battalion. and somebody
there looked it over and then went to division
level and it was filed away somewhere then. Would
you say all that record keeping that had to be done,
everything detailed, was that really necessary
or was it just like a waste of time? No, I think it was
necessary. The problem is at the time when you're
doing it, it seems kind of like a waste of time, but
four years later the historical part of it I think
will be very accurate because we kept good
records. And I think it's essential to keep good
records, particularly in today's world of
liability. The accurate record keeping that we
learned and did there, I think, is still what you
need to do today, if not more so. Now, what were some
of your other missions in the more remote areas
that you would do other things than just be
stationed at your hospital? Could you explain
some of the other things you might have done? Well,
other than going out in the villages on what we call
MedCap missions,
once a month
we would maybe get to go to Da Nang, which is 50 miles
away, and we'd have to ride an airplane, which took
You know, you had to go out and sit around all day
long to wait for the airplane, and you would drive
denying, and you'd have to find somebody sort of to
stay with when you got there. And we would usually
do this on Friday, and then on Saturday morning
there was what was called an I-Corps, number one
corps, medical meeting. And it was basically just
an attempt of physicians in the I-Corps, which was
the northern third of Vietnam, to... keep up on
things and at this meeting we would give reports on
what we've been doing and what was happening and
that we were here lectured many times on how to take
care of various kinds of injuries or various kinds
of medical problems there would usually be
demonstrations sometimes of uh that demonstrate
the kind of equipment that they've captured from
the north vietnamese or from vietcong and i have
pictures of many of the things that i saw that
worked on display for us and we were really
surprised and amazed how well they were equipped
in their aid stations and in their little
hospitals that were probably underground
someplace because they had regular operating
facilities I think in many areas for taking care of
their wounded. And we've read about the ones that
have just had fabulous networks of tunnels with
all hospital facilities. I never saw any of those
but I heard about them and I think they were
probably there One of the other things that we
would do, I would sometimes go out with the Red
Cross people to contact soldiers for emergency
messages back home. Usually if a soldier's family
had a death in the family, they would try to hold up
the funeral until the soldier could be gotten
home. That was one of the biggest services, I
think, of the Red Cross was taking care of
emergency situations for a soldier and his
family. And that was very well taken care of, I
think, in most cases. And the average soldier
could be probably back in the United States in
about three to four days from the time he received
word of a death in the family.
Were you ever stationed in an area where you were
having to treat a lot of serious injuries, people
coming in? Yes, I was. After the first six months in
July, I then went to a hospital facility where I got
to spend six more months. And three months of that
was in on K. I think it's spelled a n capital k h e.
That was in the Central Highlands and I was with the
17th field hospital there. I was basically
assigned as a assistant surgeon. which meant that
I couldn't initiate most surgery by myself, but I
helped other surgeons who were fully trained,
since I'd only had two years of surgery at the time.
It was an extremely good experience for me because
I worked with two fully trained people all the
time, and it was basically like a residency
training program. These two guys had just
finished their residency, and they were very
interested in teaching me anything they could,
and I was very interested in learning. So
basically, I helped them with everything that
they did, and they let me do as much as I could do. In
many cases, when we would be covered up with
injuries, and they were very severe injuries in
this particular area, lots of gunshot wounds,
landmine wounds, pungi stick wounds, I would be
starting a case, opening up the abdomen of the
injured person or whatever was required, one of
the fully trained people would then come over and
help me take care of the major problem or take care
of it himself, then I would be allowed to go ahead
and close that person's abdomen, which is what
happens in most residency programs. The
beginning surgeon gets to do the easier parts,
such as opening and closing, and then the fully
trained person does the major operation itself.
And that's basically the role I had there. What
were the conditions of most of the men you saw as
coming in there yet? were they mostly gunshot
wounds, landmines, things like that? How long had
they been around and things like that? Well, most
of the people we saw were very freshly injured,
such as almost always within an hour. And they were
gunshot wounds, fragment wounds from mines,
grenades, mortars, rocket attacks, and pungi
stick wounds. Pungi stick wounds were fairly
frequent because people, as they walked through
the jungle, would run on these fungi sticks which
were a very sharp angled bamboo stake. They
usually had feces smeared on them so they would
cause an infection in the person's leg and they
required a lot of surgical intervention simply
because you would have to make an incision around
the wound itself and excise a little bit of it, but
you would also have to go inside and do what was
called a fasciotomy. Open up the fascia around the
muscles that that pungi stick had penetrated
because the infection would make those muscles
swell up and they would become gangrenous if you
didn't allow them to swell because the pressure
had to be relieved. It seemed like you were making a
very serious operation out of a very small injury,
but if you didn't do it that way, they many times
wound up losing a large amount of muscle or even
their limb.
Let's see. Then did you also...
Let me see. Oh, from the mines. What kind of
injuries would be sustained from a landmine
injury? Well, there were several kinds of mines.
Claymore mines were some of the more common ones
and Claymore mines were
basically a kind of a broad shaped mine that had a
lot of explosive behind the pellets which were
then propelled forward when a mine went off and
they would many times be designed to cover a large
area above the ground and you could like cover a
whole road or something like that with one of these
mines. so that anything that was coming down the
road would probably get hit by one of these mine
fragments. We saw a lot of makeshift mines also
that were made by various people, mostly
Vietnamese, from bombs that hadn't exploded or
from rockets or mortars that hadn't exploded. And
they would hook them up to some sort of detonating
device and blow up vehicles on the road, blow up
people out in the jungle. They were very good at
making mines out of what we thought were dead bombs
and dead equipment.
When you were treating these injuries, you didn't
see a lot of serious injuries. Was it hard for you to
treat them and know that you were just going to send
them right back into combat? No, I don't think so. I
don't think that really ever crossed your mind.
It's just like when you're taking care of a sick
civilian anywhere else in the world. Your job is to
get him back to the workplace so he can do what his
job in life is. And in a combat situation, it's very
much the same. It wasn't the kind of situation
where you had a real personal relationship with
the people. If it had been one of your friends or
relatives, it might have been different. But your
job was to keep the fighting man healthy, and that
was what we did. Did you ever treat any of the Arvin
soldiers or even BC? Oh, yeah, we treated Arvin
soldiers all the time. We commonly treated the
Rock soldiers. We treated the
Mountain Yard soldiers when we were in the Central
Highlands. We treated anybody that was brought
in, and that many times included BC soldiers and
North Vietnamese soldiers. They had already had
their weapons and everything taken away from
them. They were injured. Many times these guys
would be very sick because they might have been
shot a day or two ahead of time and hidden
somewhere, and they would come in all bloated up
and very, very ill by the time we saw them. We
frequently had to amputate limbs simply because
they had very little primary medical care, and by
the time we saw them, They were very sick and in
severe condition, and they many times did require
amputations just to get rid of a very infected part
of their body. And what about the Arvin troops
themselves as soldiers? How do you think they
performed? Well, I was never very impressed with
the Arvin soldiers in general.
I think the average American soldier that I was
around seemed to think of them as like Boy Scouts,
like we were training junior soldiers to do a job.
And they were basically kind of treated as though
they weren't really capable of doing this
themselves right now. They were sort of just
supposed to stand around and watch how the
Americans did it. And I thought they were probably
treated as inferiors And most of them that I saw
acted as though they were inferiors. Do you think
had they been treated differently, they wouldn't
behave differently? I don't know. I don't guess I
can answer that because I never saw any of them for
any long period of time to see how they developed
after they became experienced. I always thought
they basically took advantage of our situation.
They let our men go out and do most of the fighting
when they could, and they sort of stood around and
watched or guarded the town while somebody else
was out doing the fighting. I was not impressed
with the urban soldiers at all. How about the
Saigon government? Do you feel that the Saigon
government was really worthy of our support and
capable of controlling the country themselves?
Well, looking at it 20 years later, I probably...
don't think that they were worthy of it. And I'm not
sure exactly why that is. But at the time I was
there, I didn't have any idea what was going on
militarily or politically. And I can't ever
remember talking to anybody who basically
strongly thought we should have been in Vietnam.
Most people were just there because they were told
to go and it was their assignment. I don't think we
had any
I don't think we had a lot of patriotic reason to be
there as soldiers, and we didn't feel that we were
there doing some great job for some nation that
needed us dramatically. It was just a job for you.
It was just an assignment, that was it. And from all
the people I saw who were privates all the way up to
generals, I really never talked to anybody who
thought we probably should have been there. And we
were doing a lot of good. I don't think that was the
average person's viewpoint. Now, when you were in
Vietnam, were you ever aware, before you went or
while you were there, of the rising anti-war
sentiments and protests and trouble back home
that was brewing? No. When I was there in 1968, 69,
that was the year the man landed on the moon first.
It was the year
Ted Kennedy drove off the bridge at
Chappaquiddick. We heard a little bit about that.
Those were the two big events. And I recall, I
think, that they happened the same week so that
Teddy's
problem never got as nearly as much publicity as it
would have had we not landed a man on the moon that
same week. Well, we really never heard much about
what was going on back home. Everything we read was
in the daily newspaper that was printed by the
Army. And so unless you got a paper from home, which
might take a couple weeks to get there, you didn't
know much at all. And I was not aware at all of the
sentiment back home about the war. We would
occasionally hear something about university
students acting up or protesting, but I didn't
know anything really about it. How about after you
came back? Well, after I came back, I became very
aware of that because I came back to Fort Eustis,
Virginia, which was fairly close to Richmond, and
I knew the students were acting up on those
campuses at that time, and people were beginning
to demand all over the United States that we pull
out of Vietnam, and it seemed like probably the
thing to do to me It seemed proper for us to pull out
simply because we'd been there so long and had
never really given a concerted effort to win the
war, either for the Vietnamese or to make them win
the war. And I thought if we weren't going to really
give it 100%, then we should pull back and get out of
it, which we did shortly after that. What about
Nixon's handling then of the Vietnamization
process, getting him out and trying to turn
control of the Vietnamese? Do you think he did a
good job or a fair job I don't know if I can answer
that or not, because I didn't know that much about
the political side of it. I was still in the Army at
the time, and I was real busy as a surgeon.
I thought he did what was proper, basically, in
getting us out of there as quickly as he could once a
decision was made. While I was in Vietnam, Lyndon
Johnson was still president, and I was there
during the time we had 500,000 men there.
Obviously, if we had put out a big effort, 500,000
of us could have probably done a lot more than we did
because we really were there basically occupying
the country. We weren't there fighting war, in my
experience, in my opinion. One set of figures we
come across pretty often in my class is that there
were 500 or 540,000 people there, but of that
number, only 80,000 were combat troops. That's
probably right. There's just a lot of backup.
Yeah, I think that's probably right. While I was
there also, he started bombing the North. And I
don't know that that really changed things very
much, as far as we were concerned. I was also there
during the year when Ho Chi Minh died. And that was
kind of an interesting experience because I was in
a hospital that was basically a prisoner of war
hospital. We took care of mostly prisoners of war.
And that was in Quy Nhon, a huge, Q-H-I.
It's
Y-H-O-N, I think, or something like that. This was
basically a... We took care of a lot of our own
troops, but we also... It was a prisoner of war
hospital. Once the prison... We took care of
prisoners immediately after they came in, and
then we also kept them around for a while until they
were assigned to go to a... Army unit to be in. It was
like a prison camp, yeah. But a large number of
those guys we had had amputations and that sort of
thing, and they stayed around a pretty long period
of time. And I got to know some of them, and I grew to
like and trust most of the North Vietnamese that I
took care of. I thought they were much more honest
and probably Harder working and much better
soldiers than the South Vietnamese that I was
around. During the time that I was there when Ho Chi
Minh died, it was very interesting because all the
guys who, when they heard about his dying, wore a
black sleeve patch made out of something. And we
never...
interfered in any way with their doing this
because it was their way of mourning for their
leader. And I think it was what any soldier would
have done had his leader died. I only hope that our
soldiers did the same thing for our president when
he died during that same time frame. Did you notice
any mourning with the southerners, the South
Vietnamese? Did they feel a loss? I don't think the
South Vietnamese felt lost at all. Most of them
seemed to feel that... I don't... Most of the South
Vietnamese that I was around were not highly
educated people historically, and I don't think
that they felt very much for Ho Chi Minh or that they
really believed that he was trying to save Vietnam
and such. And from what I've seen, it looks to me
like he dedicated his whole life to saving Vietnam
as a whole and when he couldn't get help one place
and he went somewhere else to get the help.